Add tutorial on creating a custom wake word (#29298)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/voice_control/create_wake_word.markdown

---
title: "Create your own wake word"
---

> You can now create your own wake word. The procedure below will take you into a Python environment to train a model. The model is trained on synthetic voice clips that are generated by the local neural text-to-speech system [Piper](https://github.com/rhasspy/piper). Want to now more about how this all works? Check out the [openWakeWord](https://github.com/dscripka/openWakeWord) project by David Scripka.

Reviewer: The word Python here is not needed and can only be seen as scary.

```suggestion
You can now create your own wake word to use with Home Assistant. The procedure below will guide you to train a model. The model is trained using voice clips generated by our local neural text-to-speech system [Piper](https://github.com/rhasspy/piper).

_Want to now more about how this all works? Check out the [openWakeWord](https://github.com/dscripka/openWakeWord) project by David Scripka.)_
```

Depending on the word, training a model on your own wake word may take a few iterations and a bit of tweaking. This guide will take you through the process step by step.

## Prerequisites

- latest version of Home Assistant
- [M5Stack ATOM Echo Development Kit](https://shop.m5stack.com/products/atom-echo-smart-speaker-dev-kit?ref=NabuCasa)
- successfully completed the [$13 voice remote for Home Assistant](/voice_control/thirteen-usd-voice-remote/) tutorial

## To create your own wake word

1. Think of a wake word.
   - A word or short phrase (3-4 syllables) that is not commonly used so that it does not trigger Home Assistant by mistake.
   - Currently, only wake words in English are supported.
2. Open the [wake word training environment](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1q1oe2zOyZp7UsB3jJiQ1IFn8z5YfjwEb?usp=sharing#scrollTo=1cbqBebHXjFD).
3. In section 1, enter your wake word in the **target_word** field.
![Enter wake word in target field](/images/assist/wake_word_enter_target_word.png)

> 4. In the code section next to the **target_word**, select the play button.

Reviewer: Should we mention that the first time it can take 30 seconds?
```suggestion
4. In the code section next to the **target_word**, select the play button. The first time this can take up to 30 seconds.
```

   - If the play button does not appear, make sure your cursor is placed in the **target_word** field.
     ![Select play button](/images/assist/wake_word_press_play_button.png)
   - If it still does not show up, in the top right corner of the document, make sure it says **Connected**.
     - If it is not connected, select **Connect to a hosted runtime**.
     ![Connect to hosted runtime](/images/assist/wake_word_connect_to_hosted_runtime.png)
   - **Result**: The pronunciation of your wake word is being created.
     - Once it is finished, at the bottom of the section, you see an audio file. Listen to it.
  
     ![Listen to demo of your wake word](/images/assist/wake_word_listen_demo.png)
5. If the word does not sound correct to you:
   - Follow the instructions in the document to tweak the spelling of the word and press play again.
   - The word should sound the way you pronounce it.
6. Once you are satisfied with the result, in the menu on top of the screen, select **Runtime** > **Run all**.

>    - This may take a while.

Reviewer: Let's be more specific.

```suggestion
   - This will take around an hour. Feel free to do something else but make sure to leave the browser tab open.
```

   ![Runtime: run all](/images/assist/wake_word_runtime_run_all.png)
   - **Result**: Once this process is finished, you should have 2 files in your downloads folder:
     - `.tflite` and `.onnx` files (only `.tflite` is used)

7. Congratulations! You just applied machine learning to create your own wake word model!
   - The next step is to add it to Home Assistant.

## To add your personal wake word to Home Assistant

1. Make sure you have the [Samba add-on installed](/common-tasks/os/#configuring-access-to-files).
2. On your computer, access your Home Assistant server via Samba.
   - Open the `share` folder and create a new folder `openwakeword` so that you have `/share/openwakeword`.
3. Drop your shiny new wake word model file (`.tflite`) into that folder.

> 4. Restart the **Wyoming** integration.

Reviewer: This will not be necessary once https://github.com/home-assistant/core/pull/101827 ships. (which we aim to do before the release tomorrow)

---
title: "Create your own wake word"
---

> You can now create your own wake word. The procedure below will take you into a Python environment to train a model. The model is trained on fake voices that were generated by the local neural text-to-speech system [Piper](https://github.com/rhasspy/piper). Want to now more about how this all works? Check out the [openWakeWord](https://github.com/dscripka/openWakeWord) project by David Scripka.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can now create your own wake word. The procedure below will take you into a Python environment to train a model. The model is trained on synthetic voice clips that are generated by the local neural text-to-speech system [Piper](https://github.com/rhasspy/piper). Want to now more about how this all works? Check out the [openWakeWord](https://github.com/dscripka/openWakeWord) project by David Scripka.
```

> You can now create your own wake word. The procedure below will take you into a Python environment to train a model. The model is trained on fake voices that were generated by the local neural text-to-speech system [Piper](https://github.com/rhasspy/piper). Want to now more about how this all works? Check out the [openWakeWord](https://github.com/dscripka/openWakeWord) project by David Scripka.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now create your own wake word. The procedure below will take you into a Python environment to train a basic wake word model. The model is trained on fake voices that were generated by our local neural text-to-speech system [Piper](https://github.com/rhasspy/piper). Want to now more about how this all works? Check out the [openWakeWord](https://github.com/dscripka/openWakeWord) project by David Scripka.
```

Depending on the word, training a model on your own wake word may take a few iterations and a bit of tweaking. This guide will take you through the process step by step.

## Prerequisites

- latest version of Home Assistant
- [M5Stack ATOM Echo Development Kit](https://shop.m5stack.com/products/atom-echo-smart-speaker-dev-kit?ref=NabuCasa)
- successfully completed the [$13 voice remote for Home Assistant](/voice_control/thirteen-usd-voice-remote/) tutorial

## To create your own wake word

1. Think of a wake word.

>    - A word that is not commonly used so that it does not trigger Home Assistant by mistake.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - A word or short phrase (3-4 syllables) that is not commonly used so that it does not trigger Home Assistant by mistake.
```

3. In section 1, enter your wake word in the **target_word** field.
![Enter wake word in target field](/images/assist/wake_word_enter_target_word.png)
4. In the code section next to the **target_word**, select the play button.
   - If the play button does not appear, make sure your cursor is placed in the **target_word** field.
     ![Select play button](/images/assist/wake_word_press_play_button.png)
   - If it still does not show up, in the top right corner of the document, make sure it says **Connected**.
     - If it is not connected, select **Connect to a hosted runtime**.
     ![Connect to hosted runtime](/images/assist/wake_word_connect_to_hosted_runtime.png)
   - **Result**: The pronunciation of your wake word is being created.
     - Once it is finished, at the bottom of the section, you see an audio file. Listen to it.
  
     ![Listen to demo of your wake word](/images/assist/wake_word_listen_demo.png)
5. If the word does not sound correct to you:
   - Follow the instructions in the document to tweak the spelling of the word and press play again.
   - The word should sound the way you pronounce it.

> 6. Once you are satisfied with the result, in section 2, select the play button.

Reviewer: Instead of telling users to individually run each section, why not follow the notebook instructions and do runtime -> Run all cells ?

Author: :laughing: I didn't realize

   - This may take a while.
   ![Download data](/images/assist/wake_word_download_data.png)
7. Once this is done, select the play button in section 3.
   - This may take a while.
   - There are 3 options to tweak. For the time being, don't change any settings.
   - **Result**: Once this process is finished, you should have 2 files in your downloads folder:

>      - `.tflite` and `.onnx` files

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     - `.tflite` and `.onnx` files (only `.tflite` is used)
```

8. Congratulations! You just applied machine learning to create your own wake word model!
   - The next step is to add it to Home Assistant.

## To add your personal wake word to Home Assistant

1. Make sure you have the [Samba add-on installed](/common-tasks/os/#configuring-access-to-files).
2. On your computer, access your Home Assistant server via Samba.
   - Open the `share` folder and create a new folder `openwakeword` so that you have `/share/openwakeword`.

> 3. Drop your shiny new wake word model files into that folder.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Drop your shiny new wake word model file (`.tflite`) into that folder.
```

> 4. Restart Home Assistant.

Reviewer: This is not needed. Instead, you just need to reload the Wyoming integration that points at openWakeWord (and that too is being fixed by Mike)

> 4. Restart Home Assistant.

Reviewer 2: Technically, they should just need to reload the Wyoming integration for openWakeWord. But this will accomplish that too.

5. Go to {% my voice_assistants title="**Settings** > **Voice assistants**" %}.
   - Either create a new assistant and select **Add assistant**.

>    - Or, edit an existing assistant.

Reviewer: You can only select openwakeword if you have installed the add-on.

Reviewer: Oh I guess it was installed in the other tutorial. We might want to mention that, something like this:

If you don't have openWakeWord installed, check the $13 voice assistant tutorial.

6. Under **Wake word**, select **openwakeword**.
   - Then, select your own personal wake word.
7. Enable this new assistant on your ATOM Echo device.
   - Go to {% my integrations title="**Settings** > **Devices & Services**" %} and select the **ESPHome** integration.
      - Under **M5Stack ATOM Echo**, select **1 device**.
   - Under **Controls**, make sure **Use wake word** is enabled.
   - Under **Configuration**, select the assistant with your wake word.

     ![Select the assistant with your wake word](/images/assist/wake_word_select_assistant.png)

>    - Restart Home Assistant.

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't be necessary.
